--- 
title: "Japanservation: automatic doors hate me"
tags: 
- japan
layout: post
---
At the time of writing, the worst physical encounter I've had in Japan (with
an inanimate object) was with one of the first automatic doors I went through.
Me, 6'1", with a giant and full travel backpack strapped to my back attempting
to step up into a restaurant while simultaneously having to bend down to avoid
hitting my head on the lowered ceiling; I failed in almost every possible way.

Not unlike in the US, most modern doors in Japan for shops, restaurants,
stations, etc are automatic. The behavior of the doors is very different,
though, and much to the amusement of bystanders I've clipped myself on the
door while it was opening quite a few times.

There are two types in common use: the manual automatic door and the normal
motion-sensing automatic door.

The manual automatic doors were a little unexpected - you press a button on
the handle to have them slide open Star Trek style. They feel like the modern
incarnation of the traditional Japanese sliding door, and they certainly save
space vs. a western-style swinging door. I'm actually surprised these kinds of
doors haven't caught on in the west.

The normal motion-sensing doors, though, are evil. In the US, with it's large
(and often unused) exterior sidewalks, the sensors on the doors are tuned such
that you can be walking at a fast-pace towards the door and it'll be wide open
by the time you reach it. Not so in Japan, as I've been subconsciously
training myself with negative reenforcement.

Due to the confined spaces and frequent foot traffic the sensors require you
to come within a few inches of the door and wait a second before it opens to
prevent the otherwise constant false-positive open-closes that would occur.
Being trained for 27 years on how to approach automatic doors, it's been an
interesting transition with many hit shoulders. I'm finally getting the hang
of it. Hooray me.

Current working theory: the slow-to-open automatic doors are intentional
forced moments of awareness for otherwise heads-down-on-phone/book daily
commuters.

