---
title: On Dear Esther
tags:
- games
layout: post
---
I really wanted to like this game and all signs pointed to it being a new
favorite for me - I love supporting indies, I love games with great sound
design, and I love games with strong narrative. A friend even bugged me for
having not played it, telling me to leave work so I could go experience it
right away and report back with how much I liked it. He was that certain it
fit me, and before I sat down to play it I was quite certain myself. How could
I dislike something that sounds almost as if it was built just for me?

And then I played it. I'll admit the visuals are subtlety stunning (it is only
the Source engine they're working with, after all, and they have really made
it shine), the music is perfect and well placed, and the audio cues create an
intensely eery world. But the narrative - the one gameplay element the entire
experience hinges on -  was so disappointing for me that I couldn't overlook
it. I quit after only 25 minutes, which amounts to the first chapter.

I have a fairly high tolerance for bad stories. Steam tells me that I played
Duke Nukem Forever for 2 hours - over 4x longer than Dear Esther. _Why_, when
Dear Esther has an objectively better story than DNF, _could I not stomach
it?_

After quitting the game I decided to check out some story analysis on the net.
Surprisingly I found random forum posts more enjoyable than the game itself -
I read dozens of posts, sometimes even re-reading them with more desire to
learn of the game's world than the game itself came close to imparting in me.
And that's when I realized the reason why the game didn't work for me: the way
in which the story is told does not respect the medium, or I the player.

One can never get a full view of a world through a story told in it. Good
writers work around this fact and great writers exploit it. One of the most
important acts a writer can perform for their audience is to suspend their
disbelief and make them feel as if the world they are constructing is real. In
many written or filmed works this also requires making the audience go so far
as to believe they are inside of that world, seeing it through a characters
eyes and experiencing things as they do. Failure to recognize this leaves
dull, lifeless worlds and creates similarly dull, lifeless characters to
inhabit them. Regardless of how revolutionary the story being told is if the
audience cannot connect the story will not reach them. In games this
suspension of disbelief is not optional: the ability to play a passive
observer does not exist; the player is in control, and the player must believe
they are a full participant in the game world.

Where Dear Esther fails for me is in its complete lack of regard for this last
fact: not once in my 25 minutes of play did I believe that I was the character
I was controlling and I felt no empathy for him. Note that I chose 'him' and
not 'me' - I did not feel like this was a character I was living through.
Seeing the shoreline of the island, hearing the breeze on the bushes,
squinting to see the aerial tower in the distance - all would have had
significantly more impact had I, even for a moment, felt as if it was my eyes
seeing it or ears hearing it. Pretty scenery and a great justification for
having purchased absurdly expensive headphones is not enough to get me to
invest my time and emotional energy. When the narrated lines of dialog came
up, revealing bits of the story, I felt complete and utter apathy. _Who cares?
Let's find some more pretty cave paintings!_

Nameless, faceless, timeless, emotionless, memory-less lead characters in
games are fine when you are gunning down aliens in corridors, but dropping a
player in a world the way Dear Esther did and expecting them to care about
anything is incredibly naive. It's especially bad in a game compared to other
mediums due to the direct control the player has, but I'd argue that no great
writer would ever release a film or novel with the same lack of concern for
their audience's engagement.

The more mysterious your story or world is, the stronger the narrative must
be. Dear Esther reached too far and didn't have the support to make it fly.

