---
title: "Japanservation: the click-clack of high heels on escalators"
tags:
- japan
layout: post
---
My first thought on Japanese urban fashion was that it was an anachronism;
that despite the ultra-modern buildings and tech the clothing people used to
express themselves was evocative of mid-to-late 90's sitcoms mixed with
healthy doses of both posh and seriousness. It's definitely grown on me during
the past few weeks of people watching, though, and I think the comparison has
been fun.

Generally, men wear suits. Being in the country during the week-long national
holiday of golden week did give me a chance to see a bit more of the average
Tokyo wardrobe, but as soon as it was back to work the suits returned. During
morning rush in Tokyo it's difficult to find a guy *not* wearing a suit, and
those who aren't are likely tourists. I was relieved, though, to find that at
Google Tokyo the engineers don't dress up - that would have made working from
there in shorts/flip flops a bit more akward...

If you're in any moderately-sized urban area in Japan you'll notice an
unexpected but interesting bit about female fashion on weekdays: almost every
woman is wearing some form of heeled shoe at all times, regardless of weather,
activity, or time of day. I noticed this first when getting off the train from
Kansai airport. Alongside the hordes of businessmen in suits and flight-worn
travelers such as myself pushing through the station there was a cacophony of
heels against the pavement.

Tokyo women vary, but generally rushhour reveals skirt suits, lots of
stockings, and high heels. It varies even inbetween the different districts,
with most people departing a station following the local dress-code, but the
basic rule fits. I observed very few t-shirts/tank-tops/etc, and very little
color - a big difference from the US. Where as in the US most clothing seems
designed to scream LOOK AT ME the opposite is true in Japan. And that's where
it got interesting for me: after a few days what people were wearing stopped
registering, and instead I was concentrating more on the person and their
actions. It made people watching much more enjoyable.

The heels are crazy though. Urban Japan is carpeted largely with cement and
metal: stairs to and from the trains/subways, streets crisscrossing districts,
escalators elevating people from deep within the earth to the top floors of
the shopping districts. Everyone walks significantly more than the average
American, and a lot of people walk quite fast in the rush to catch their next
connection. My feet were killing me in crazy
[superfeet](http://www.superfeet.com/)-equiped athletic shoes, I don't know
how men in dress shoes and women in heels don't die.

Even outside the urban areas it's common to see girls wearing heels. On most
of my visits to the shrines, temples, and mountain tourist getaways I was
surrounded by girls walking on dirt and gravel in heels. Seriously. No one
swapped out for sneakers while they sprinted up escalators and hopped across
train platforms. It was the 'perfect image' at all times.

As if this apparent obsession with heels wasn't enough there's the
simultaneous act of vanity that most younger women seem to add to the mix:
walking pigeon-toed. According to one lady I met Japanese men find girls who
walk pigeon-toed to be cuter than their non-pigeon-toed-walking counterparts -
likely something rooted deep in geisha tradition. Seems as if it'd just add to
the pain. Maybe pain is attractive? Hm

Of the hundreds of girls I saw running up and down stairs in 4+in heels in the
rain with their toes turned in, none fell. Current working theory: the
Japanese have invented antigravity devices that are small enough to fit inside
a pair of Stilettos.

