--- 
title: "Japanservation: the mythical trashcan"
tags: 
- japan
layout: post
---
There are very few trashcans in the parts of Japan I've travelled to;
sometimes you can walk hours without seeing one. Only slightly more frequent
an occurrence than a garbage can is a recycling bin, often located near
vending machines.

Similar to the shoe-bombing scare and the subsequent TSA shoe-removal
policies, fear of bombs and such has caused public cans to all but disappear
completely (or so I was told). It could also be a cost thing, however with how
much is spent keeping everything else spotless I doubt it.

I haven't seen much of an effort towards conservation; individually plastic-
wrapped qtips and toothpicks being two examples of that. I'm especially
surprised by this in large cities like Tokyo and Osaka, where the population
density is such that the amount of trash produced is mind-bogglingly high. The
plastic bag seems to be as ubiquitous as water, but despite the lack of
trashcans there are few to be found drifting about.

Another likely reason why things feel so clean is that the Japanese seem to
chew very little gum, or if and when they do they tend to somehow dispose of
it without throwing it on the ground. Even some stations and sidewalks built
10-20yrs ago look as if they are new, largely due to the lack of blackened,
petrified gum marring every surface.

And there's no graffiti. What graffiti exists is contained to very small
areas, usually those considered to be centers of counterculture. There are
sometimes stickers or small tags on signs but rarely building-side tags like
in the US. Most of the artsier works are likely paid for or allowed by
business owners (such as the store fronts in Harajuku), but the kind of large-
scale city-funded street art as present in places like Seattle is virtually
non-existent. The result is cities that are much cleaner looking, but often
lack character. When it comes to the beauty of an area a higher reliance is
placed on architecture, terrain, and storefront decoration.

Current working theory as to why the streets are so clean even without
trashcans: the Japanese have developed the magical ability to turn PET plastic
bottles into doves.

